---
layout: post
title: "Nintendo DS: A beloved handheld comes to an end"
date:   2023-12-29 12:28:03 +0000
categories: ['News','Gaming']
excerpt_image: https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/images.linnlive.com/c9732cbfb4899b27b5fc880737301c3f/6a66aeec-65fd-4fd5-a8ef-89326abdbb27.jpg
image: https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/images.linnlive.com/c9732cbfb4899b27b5fc880737301c3f/6a66aeec-65fd-4fd5-a8ef-89326abdbb27.jpg
---

###A Legacy of Innovation and Success
The **Nintendo DS handheld console** set itself apart from its competitors through its dual-screen **touchscreen gameplay**. Launched in 2004, the DS took the market by storm with its innovative new design that allowed for games unlike anything seen before on a portable system. Over its lifespan, the DS saw multiple hardware revisions including the DS Lite and DSi that further refined the concept and added new features like a camera. **By the end of its run, the Nintendo DS series had sold over 154 million units worldwide**, cementing it as one of the best-selling video game consoles of all time. Its success could be attributed to Nintendo's relentless focus on fun, family-friendly gameplay that broadened video game audiences.
###Evolving Gameplay on Dual-Screens 
The asymmetric dual-screen setup of the original DS opened up wholly new possibilities for **portable gaming experiences**. Early DS titles like Nintendogs and Brain Age leveraged the lower touch screen in creative ways. Later hits like New Super Mario Bros. and The Legend of Zelda: Phantom Hourglass skillfully integrated both screens for immersive side-scrolling and overhead adventures. Perhaps the most iconic DS games were the Pokémon franchises like Pokémon Diamond and Pearl that utilized wireless connectivity and touch controls to their fullest. These seminal DS games continues to be revered and inspire new generations of developers even today.
###Bridging Generations with Family Fun
Beyond its technical innovations, the Nintendo DS succeeded through its focus on family-friendly games with mass appeal. Titles like Cooking Mama, Imagine Babyz, and Animal Crossing: Wild World brought joy to people of all ages. The accessible touchscreen interface opened video gaming to new demographics like casual older players and young children. Nintendo also fostered a vibrant community through online leaderboards and games supporting local wireless multiplayer. This welcoming of all players is what allowed the **Nintendo DS to become a true phenomenon spanning generations**.
###Revolution through Iteration with DS Lite and DSi
In 2006, Nintendo followed up the original DS with the slimmer and improved DS Lite. **Its exterior redesign** addressed ergonomic issues while keeping the beloved dual-screen experience. In 2008, the DSi debuted new features like an integrated camera, photo gallery, and DSi Shop for downloads. These gradual hardware refreships kept the DS ecosystem fresh for another few years. Games like New Super Mario Bros. DS and Pokémon Platinum took even better advantage of the finer-tuned hardware. The upgraded models continued propagating portable Nintendo's trademark **family-centric gameplay values**. 
###The Final Iteration: Nintendo 2DS XL  
As the DS lineup matured, the last major revision was 2017's Nintendo 2DS XL. Ditching stereoscopic 3D, it retained all other features while slimming down to an attractive slate form factor. Redesigned for supreme comfort during long play sessions, it catered especially to the hand cramps experienced by younger gamers. Titles like Pokémon Ultra Sun and Moon and Kirby: Battle Royale received **2DS XL-enhanced ports**, giving this final model a respectable library. While not a showstopper, the Nintendo 2DS XL wrapped up the Nintendo DS legacy on a competent note.
###A Hybrid Successor Emerges
Just as the Nintendo DS reached the end of profitable life cycle, Nintendo made a bold move in early 2017 with the launch of the Nintendo Switch hybrid console. Combining high-definition **home console graphics** with portable versatility, the Switch seamlessly bridged living room and mobile gameplay. With its instant-sleep/wake functionality, consumers could easily pick up right where they left off between TV and handheld modes. Seeing the Switch as the **ideal successor platform**, Nintendo phased out dedicated DS production to focus on this exciting new hybrid direction.
###Nintendo Dominates Handhelds Once Again
Under the leadership of Shigeru Miyamoto and later Reggie Fils-Aime, Nintendo had ruled the portable gaming market for over two decades. Starting from the Game Boy, they successfully leveraged their handheld dominance into the DS era with another **154 million units sold**. However, as mobile gaming boomed, the aging DS hardware struggled against smartphones. The Switch changed this by offering immersive console-quality experiences on the go. Backed by beloved IPs like Mario, Zelda, and Pokémon, the Switch reasserted Nintendo's **mobile gameplay supremacy** with over 79 million consoles sold in just 5 years. It seems the blue ocean of handhelds remains theirs to command.
###Legacy of the DS Lives On
While production of dedicated DS hardware ended, the system's abundant library of classics continues to enchant players both old and new. Evocative games in franchises such as Professor Layton and Ace Attorney persist due to their wit and heart. Even mundane pastimes like brain training and cooking found mainstream success on DS. Its welcoming of all demographic segments broadened gaming's positive societal impact. Although gone, the **Nintendo DS lives on in collective memories** as a seminal milestone that brought the pleasures of portable play everywhere. Its innovative spirit lives on in Nintendo's future-forward hybrid Switch console.
###Brighter Days Ahead with Nintendo Switch
With the Switch delivering Nintendo's acclaimed first-party franchises and independent hits to both TVs and hands, the system's future remains bright. Its creative use of modularity with various Joy-Con controller attachments continues the DS tradition of surprising players. Upcoming heavy hitters like The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the Kingdom and Pokémon Scarlet and Violet ensure Switch owners stay entertained for years to come. As the definitive successor, the Switch ably carries gaming further by seamlessly weaving living room and personal play. Under Nintendo's expert stewardship, hybrid home-handheld gameplay is poised for a long and vibrant future.